---
layout: page
title: Parametrizing Surfaces - Part 2
primary: true
---

## Spheres

We can parametrize a sphere by (using the physics / ISO convention, see below for the mathematics convention):


$$

\begin{aligned}
x(\phi, \theta) &= r \cos(\phi) \sin(\theta) \\
y(\phi, \theta) &= r \sin(\phi) \sin(\theta) \\
z(\phi, \theta) &= r \cos(\theta)
\end{aligned} \tag{3.80}

$$


We can also create a system of mutually orthogonal unit vectors in this system:


$$

\begin{aligned}
\hat{r} &= \big( \cos(\phi)\sin(\theta), \, \sin(\phi)\sin(\theta), \, \cos(\theta) \big) \\
        &= \cos(\phi)\sin(\theta)\,\hat{x} + \sin(\phi)\sin(\theta)\,\hat{y} + \cos(\theta)\,\hat{z} \\
\\
\hat{\phi} &= \big(-\sin(\phi), \, \cos(\phi), \, 0 \big) \\
           &= -\sin(\phi)\,\hat{x} + \cos(\phi)\,\hat{y} \\
\\
\hat{\theta} &= \big(\cos(\theta)\cos(\phi), \, \cos(\theta)\sin(\phi), \, -\sin(\theta) \big) \\
             &= \cos(\theta)\cos(\phi)\,\hat{x} + \cos(\theta)\sin(\phi)\,\hat{y} - \sin(\theta)\,\hat{z}
\end{aligned} \tag{3.81}

$$


There are two equally common notations for spherical coordinates.  
The physics / ISO standard convention uses **θ** for the zenith angle and **φ** for the azimuth.  
The mathematics convention swaps this. Both systems use either *r* or *ρ* for the radius, and both are commonly used. You will encounter both on MITx.

---

### The mathematics convention goes as follows:


$$

\begin{aligned}
x(\theta, \phi) &= r \cos(\theta)\sin(\phi) \\
y(\theta, \phi) &= r \sin(\theta)\sin(\phi) \\
z(\theta, \phi) &= r \cos(\phi)
\end{aligned} \tag{3.82}

$$


Corresponding orthogonal unit vectors:


$$

\begin{aligned}
\hat{r} &= \big( \cos(\theta)\sin(\phi), \, \sin(\theta)\sin(\phi), \, \cos(\phi) \big) \\
        &= \cos(\theta)\sin(\phi)\,\hat{x} + \sin(\theta)\sin(\phi)\,\hat{y} + \cos(\phi)\,\hat{z} \\
\\
\hat{\theta} &= \big(-\sin(\theta), \, \cos(\theta), \, 0 \big) \\
             &= -\sin(\theta)\,\hat{x} + \cos(\theta)\,\hat{y} \\
\\
\hat{\phi} &= \big(\cos(\phi)\cos(\theta), \, \cos(\phi)\sin(\theta), \, -\sin(\phi) \big) \\
           &= \cos(\phi)\cos(\theta)\,\hat{x} + \cos(\phi)\sin(\theta)\,\hat{y} - \sin(\phi)\,\hat{z}
\end{aligned} \tag{3.83}

$$


---

### A Word of Caution

Most of this course will use the **mathematics convention**  
\((r, \theta, \phi)\), where **θ** is the azimuth angle and **φ** is the zenith angle.  

A handful of problems and discussions use the physics convention (as seen in the lecture and summary above), but we will always state explicitly when this is the case.  

⚠️ Many online articles (e.g., Wikipedia) and most physics textbooks use the physics / ISO standard instead, so be careful. Always double-check which variables are being used when working in spherical coordinates.

---

## Möbius Strips

A Möbius strip can be made by taking a piece of paper, twisting it, and gluing the sides.  
This gives us a means of parametrizing the object:


$$

\begin{aligned}
x(u, v) &= \left(1 + \frac{v}{2} \cos\left(\frac{u}{2}\right)\right)\cos(u) \\
y(u, v) &= \left(1 + \frac{v}{2} \cos\left(\frac{u}{2}\right)\right)\sin(u) \\
z(u, v) &= \frac{v}{2} \sin\left(\frac{u}{2}\right)
\end{aligned} \tag{3.84}

$$
